docs: [FC-0074] add more detailed concepts on events (#406)
openedx/openedx-events: docs/concepts/openedx-events.rst

Open edX Events
===============

In the context of Open edX, events provide a mechanism for extending the platform by enabling developers to listen to specific Django signals emitted by various services and respond accordingly. This allows for customized reactions to key actions or changes within the platform without modifying the Open edX platform codebase.

What are Open edX Events?
-------------------------

An Open edX Event is an Open edX-specific Django signal emitted by a service when a specific action or event occurs. These signals notify other services or components of the platform that an event has taken place, allowing them to respond accordingly. Events are defined using the ``OpenEdxPublicSignal`` class, which provides a structured way to define the data and metadata associated with the event and other relevant information.

> Why are Open edX Events important?

Author: I think we need more reasons here explaining why Open edX Events are important besides what they allow us to do.

Author: I decided to move this to a more generic "why to use the Open edX Hooks" section: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-events/pull/406/files#diff-d186fdffb21d5d2deb62cdc3cc4135a6bebd1d2e22a4218cc6ad5c6647f6d9a0R25-R54

----------------------------------

Open edX Events are a key component of the Hooks Extension Framework, which allows developers to extend the platform's functionality in a stable and maintainable way. By triggering events for specific actions or changes within the platform, developers can create event handlers that respond to these events and perform additional actions or processing as needed. This enables many use cases, from integrating with external systems to implementing custom business logic.

How are Open edX Events used?
-----------------------------

> Developers can create handlers for Open edX Events by implementing Django signal handlers that respond to these events emitted by the platform. These signal handlers can be registered using Django's signal mechanism, allowing them to listen for events and execute custom logic in response.

Author: I think it'd be helpful to add a short list of how they're used in the community.

Author: Yes, I'll be working on this.

What are Open edX Events?
-------------------------

Open edX Events are signals emitted by a service (e.g., LMS, CMS, or others) within the Open edX ecosystem to notify that an action has occurred. For example, a user may have registered, logged in, or created a course.

These events are built on top of Django signals, inheriting their behavior while also incorporating metadata and actions specific to the Open edX ecosystem, making them uniquely suited for Open edX. Since they are essentially Django signals tailored to Open edX's specific needs, we can refer to `Django Signals Documentation`_ for a more detailed understanding of Open edX Events:

Django includes a “signal dispatcher” which helps decoupled applications get notified when actions occur elsewhere in the framework. In a nutshell, signals allow certain senders to notify a set of receivers that some action has taken place. They’re especially useful when many pieces of code may be interested in the same events.

> Events are primarily used as a communication method between components within the same application process or with external services using the Event Bus technology, making them the standard communication mechanism within the Open edX ecosystem.

Reviewer: Maybe have "Event Bus" link to documentation on the event bus?

Author: Done! But the only available docs we have to date about the event bus is a confluence document, so that's what I linked: https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AC/pages/3508699151/How+to+start+using+the+Event+Bus

How do Open edX Events work?
----------------------------

Open edX Events are implemented by a class called ``OpenEdxPublicSignal``, which inherits from Django’s ``Signals`` class and adds behaviors specific to the Open edX ecosystem. Thanks to this design, ``OpenEdxPublicSignal`` leverages the functionality of Django signals, allowing developers to apply their existing knowledge of the Django framework.

The event execution process follows these steps:

> 1. An application component emits an event by calling the ``send_event`` method implemented by ``OpenEdxPublicEvents``, which calls the Django signal ``send`` method under the hood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. An Open edX application component emits an event by calling the ``send_event`` method implemented by ``OpenEdxPublicEvents``, which calls the Django signal ``send`` method under the hood.

```

Using `#.` will auto-make a numbered list in rST. You need to include a blank line after each bullet point.

Author: Thanks!

2. The class generates Open edX-specific metadata for the event on the fly, like the event version or the timestamp when the event was sent. The event receivers use this metadata during their processing.

> 3. We call the ``send`` method from Django signals, which allows us to use the same Django signals registry for receiver management.

Reviewer: Who is "we"?

Author: There is no we. I changed it: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-events/pull/406/commits/6926b20ca45c80f201dd547123749aea02f3253a#diff-982f9d143e6afcea5b84eeb1ea3c3fb5412239c1968359fab161cb4af58e9b63R31

> 4. The event receivers registered by the Django signals registry mechanism for the emitted event are executed.

Reviewer: What does it mean to register an event receiver? Maybe link to documentation on this?

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. I added a reference to how to listen to signals in Django: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-events/pull/406/commits/6926b20ca45c80f201dd547123749aea02f3253a#diff-982f9d143e6afcea5b84eeb1ea3c3fb5412239c1968359fab161cb4af58e9b63R63

> 5. Each event receivers performs additional processing or triggers other actions based on the event data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Each event receiver performs additional processing or triggers other actions based on the event data.

```

6. The event is considered complete once all registered signal receivers have executed.

> Here is an example of an event in action:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of an event that triggers email in response to course enrollment in action:
```

Author: I updated the step by step with a more accurate description, could you review it again?

> 1. A user enrolls in a course, `triggering the COURSE_ENROLLMENT_CREATED event`_. This event includes information about the user, course, and enrollment details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. A user enrolls in a course, `triggering the COURSE_ENROLLMENT_CREATED event`_. This event includes information about the user, course, and enrollment details.

```

> 2. A `signal receiver listening`_ for the ``COURSE_ENROLLMENT_CREATED`` event is called and processes the event data.

Reviewer: This link is a little confusing, because the text is generic but you're referencing a specific handler. How about:

```suggestion
#. A signal receiver listening for the ``COURSE_ENROLLMENT_CREATED`` event is called and processes the event data. In this case, it would be the `course_enrollment_post_save receiver`_.

```

Author: Fixed, thank you!

3. The signal receiver sends a notification to the user's email confirming their enrollment in the course.

> 4. The event is considered complete once the signal receiver has finished processing the event.

Reviewer: Is there code or something that "considers" the event complete? I guess I don't know exactly what this means.

Author: I meant something like:

_The event processing is complete once all signal receivers have finished executing, so the application continues its execution..._

But that sounds way more complex than it actually is, so I changed it: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-events/pull/406/commits/6926b20ca45c80f201dd547123749aea02f3253a#diff-982f9d143e6afcea5b84eeb1ea3c3fb5412239c1968359fab161cb4af58e9b63R37

The `Django Signals Documentation`_ provides a more detailed explanation of how Django signals work.

How are Open edX Events used?
-----------------------------

> Developers can create receivers for Open edX Events by implementing Django signal receivers that respond to these events emitted by the Open edX platform. These signal receivers can be registered using Django's signal mechanism, allowing them to listen for events and execute custom logic in response.

Reviewer: I think it would be good to include some detail about how you don't need to modify code within the `openedx` github org to achieve this. Could we link out to some third-party examples?

Author: Absolutely! I'm working on a list of use cases. In the next few hours, I'll link the PR here in this comment.

Reviewer: Overall it Looks great now, I'll do a final review once these use cases are in

Author: I haven't had the time to work on this. So I'll be on it today. Thank you for the patience!

Author: Here's the PR with the use cases: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-events/pull/416
